# Marine heatwaves have not emerged as a dominant driver of ecological change

Alexa L. Fredston, William W. L. Cheung, Thomas L. Frölicher, Zoë Kitchel, Aurore A. Maureaud, James T. Thorson, Arnaud Auber, Bastien Mérigot, Juliano Palacios-Abrantes, Maria Lourdes D. Palomares, Laurène Pecuchet, Nancy Shackell, Malin Pinsky

Please contact A. Fredston with questions about this project. A DOI will be associated with this repository when it is published. Please cite it if data and code are reused (cite the manuscript for our results). 

## Where do the raw data come from?

We used of a number of datasets that are already publicly available and/or published with this project. These are fully described and cited in the manuscript, but we also list them here for ease of download, access, and attribution.

* Trawl data from [FISHGLOB](https://github.com/AquaAuma/fishglob), a project to harmonize publicly available trawl survey records from federal agencies around the globe. 
* Sea bottom temperature data from [GLORYS](https://www.mercator-ocean.eu/en/ocean-science/glorys/), an ocean reanalysis data product by the European Copernicus Marine Environment Modeling Service available beginning in 1993. 
* Sea surface temperature data from [OISST](https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/products/optimum-interpolation-sst), a historical satellite temperature record from the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration beginning in 1982. 
* Historical fishing pressure estimates from [Sea Around Us calculated for the Minderoo Foundation](https://s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/legacy.seaaroundus/researcher/dpauly/PDF/2021/Book%2C+chapters%2C+reports/Palomares%2Bet%2Bal%2B2021%2BEstimating%2Bthe%2Bbiomass%2Bof%2Bcommercially%2Bexploited%2Bfisheries%2Bstocks%2Bleft%2Bin%2Bthe%2Bocean.pdf).
* Species-specific realized thermal niche estimates from [Burrows et al. 2018](https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/Species_Temperature_Index_and_thermal_range_information_forNorth_Pacific_and_North_Atlantic_plankton_and_bottom_trawl_species/6855203/1).

## What's in this repository, and in what order should things be run?

The repository is organized as follows:

* `raw-data` contains raw datasets obtained from other sources (described above) that have not been changed in any way. If these are too large to host on GitHub they will be linked from here when published along with this manuscript. 
* `processed-data` contains outputs of scripts that filter, clean, summarize, or analyze data.
* `figures` contains image files of figures generated by scripts.

To reproduce the analysis, run these scripts in order:

1. `prep_survey_extent_nc.R` generates a netcdf file with the spatial footprints of trawl surveys used in the analysis, for merging with marine heatwave data. It also generates a .csv file with a "key" to translate the integer survey ID codes in the netcdf to their real names. This does not need to be re-run, but all the scripts below this should be re-run in order if the spatial footprints are updated.
1. `prep_trawl_data.R` takes the public trawl data records from [FISHGLOB](https://github.com/AquaAuma/fishglob), processes them into a standardized format with columns for survey, year, species, and CPUE in kg, and writes them out as .csv files in the `processed-data` folder. This was run on a computing server (see Notes below).
1. `prep_MHWs.R` merges those trawl records with the appropriate MHW and CTI data.
1. `temporal_beta_diversity.R` calculates interannual changes in richness and beta diversity (both total dissimilarity and individual components of nestedness and turnover for occurrence metrics and biomass gradient and balanced variation for biomass metrics).
1. `power_analysis.R` conducts a power analysis. This was run on a computing server (see Notes below).
1. `MHW_stats_and_figures_main_text.R` analyzes the data and makes figures and statistics for the main text. 
1. `MHW_stats_and_figures_supplement.Rmd` generates the entire supplement as a PDF. 

## Notes

* Large files are not on GitHub. The code contains instructions for how to download files that are missing from the version controlled repository. When published, these datasets will be available publicly at another link. 
* The `raw-data` folder is not version controlled due to its size. It contains all of the data products that were used in this project. They are not technically raw data (as some pre-processing happened before they were pulled into this project), but not processed in this repository. 
* The code makes extensive use of "the tidyverse" and associated packages like `here`. If you aren't familiar with them, just let me (Alexa) know and I can provide base-R translations. 
* Software versions used in this analysis are captured by `renv` and listed [in the lockfile](https://github.com/afredston/marine_heatwaves_trawl/blob/main/renv.lock). Here is [a summary of how renv works](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/articles/renv.html). 
* Most of these analyses were run on a personal computer, and should be easy to reproduce, except `prep_trawl_data.R` and `power_analysis.R`, which were conducted in R 3.6.0 on a machine with the following specifications: Windows Server 2019 2-Intel 6154 Xeon 3.0Ghz 18cores(36 threads) each 512 GB memory 6TB- SSD storage 18TB- HDD storage NVIDIA P4000 8Gb 10Gb ethernet
